About Us

	Our people
	Work with us
	Contact us


Our Specialisms

	Employability, Skills and Education
	Poverty and Welfare
	Health, Social Care and Wellbeing
	Charities and the Third Sector


Our Services

	Research, Consultation and Analysis
	Organisation and Partnership Development
	Grant and Fund Management
	Evaluation and Impact Measurement


Our Blogs
						
					
					
					
										
						
					
					
					
				
					Select Page
					
				
							 
			 
			
				
					
										
					
				
			
		 
			
	



			
				

				
					
					
			
		
			
		
				
				
				
				
					
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
					
					
						
						
					
				 
			 
			 
				
				
			 
				
				
			 
				
				
				
				
					
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
					
					
						
						
					
				 
			 
			 
				
				
			 
				
				
			 
				
				
				
				
					
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
					
					
						Rocket Science is a policy, research and grant management consultancy working throughout the UK
						
					
				 
			 
			 
				
				
			 
				
				
			 
				
				
				
				
					
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
					
					
						Employability, Education and skills
						We are experts in employability, skills and education, designing and improving labour market interventions and helping local areas maximise public investment.
					
				 
			 
				Find out more
			
			 
				
				
				
				
				
				
					
					
						Poverty and Welfare
						
We help organisations to understand the dynamics of poverty and disadvantage, to design solutions that address inequality and improve people’s lives.
					
				 
			 
				Find out more
			
			 
				
				
				
				
				
				
					
					
						Health, Social Care and Wellbeing
						Our work ranges from evaluating the impact of programmes through to managing funds that enable communities to become more active and healthier.
					
				 
			 
				Find out more
			
			 
				
				
				
				
				
				
					
					
						Charities and Civil Society
						We provide a wide range of services to build the skills and capabilities of charities, to help them manage change, be more resilient and demonstrate their impact.
					
				 
			 
				Find out more
			
			 
				
				
			 
				
				
			 
				
				
				
				
					
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
					
					
						We like to share our insights, thinking and experience
						
					
				 
			 
				Click here for our latest  blogs
			
			 
				
				
			 
				
				
			 
				
				
				
				
					
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
					
					
						
						
					
				 
			 
			 
				
				
			 
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
					
					
						Research, Consultation and Analysis
						We have wide ranging expertise in research, consultation and analysis.  Using innovation and best practice to deliver high quality evidence to shape action and investment.
					
				 
			 
				Find out more
			
			 
				
				
				
				
				
				
					
					
						Organisation and Partnership Development
						We help organisations and partnerships to work better, by providing expert help, facilitation and development, mentoring and one to one support.
					
				 
			 
				Find out more
			
			 
				
				
				
				
				
				
					
					
						Grant and Fund Management
						We provide grant management services to government, local authorities and funders to help them distribute their funding and support their grantees to deliver and evaluate their projects.
					
				 
			 
				Find out more
			
			 
				
				
				
				
				
				
					
					
						Evaluation and Impact Measurement
						We are experts in evaluation and impact measurement, helping organisations to understand the effectiveness of their programmes and quantify their impact.
					
				 
			 
				Find out more
			
			 
				
				
			 
				
				
			 
				
				
				
				
					
				
				
				
				
				
				
				Our people are our greatest asset
				Find out more about them
			
			 
				
				
			 
				
				
			 
				
				
				
				
					
				
				
			 
				
				
				
				
					
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
			
			 
				
				
				
				
				
				
					
					
						Get in touch
						
					
				 
			 
				
				
				
					
					
						
						Scotland                           T: 0131 226 4949
2 Melville Street Edinburgh EH3 7NS
					
				 
			 
				
				
				
					
					
						
						London                              T: 0207 253 6289
8-12 New Bridge Street London EC4V 6AL
					
				 
			 
				
				
				
					
					
						
						North East England    T: 07887 673407
The Beacon Westgate Road Newcastle upon Tyne NE4 9PQ
					
				 
			 
				
				
				
					
					
						Rocket Science UK Ltd Registered 2001 SC219011 VAT 774775476
						
					
				 
			 
				
				
				
					
					
						
						
					
				 
			 
			 
				
				
				
				
				
				Get our newsletter
				
				
					
						
						
							Success!
						
						
							
					
						First Name
						
					
							
					
						Last Name
						
					
							
					
						Email
						
					
							
							
					
						
							
							Sign up