Capabilities
Past Missions
Team
Join Our Crew
Contact


	
		
			
		

		
			
				
			
			
				
					
				
				
					Capabilities
Past Missions
Team
Join Our Crew
Contact
				
			
		

				
	


			


			
		

		
					

		
							
			
				
					
					

	
		
			


	
	
	
		
		
		

		
		A full-service marketing and public relations agency
igniting your brand and taking youto the next stratosphere of awesomeness. 

		
		LAUNCHINGBRANDS
DAILY 
	


	

		
		
					
				
	
		
			A Bold Agency with Big Ideas
We aren’t your standard agency. Think of us as your partner, a hub of creative content, branded relationships and a leader of strategic and thoughtful business models. We launch your brand and campaigns into the next atmosphere of awesome through connectors, creative spots, brand activations and a 360-degree approach to your brand.

		
	

	
		
		
			
		
	
Marketing + Strategy 
Marketing generates big data that can amount to much white noise. We connect data to insights and turn that into a winning strategy.
   
	
		
		
			
		
	
Public Relations 
A compelling story takes brands out-of-this-world and into the next galaxy. We harness that narrative and turn it into newsworthy content.
   
	
		
		
			
		
	
Advertising + Promotion 
Powerful advertising is rooted in authenticity and brought to life through emotional storytelling, exciting creative, and a compelling call-to-action.
   
	
		
		
			
		
	
Award Winning Creative 
A brand’s narrative is only as good as the visuals that surround it. And trust us, our award winning team makes you look good. Real good!
   
	
		
		
			
		
	
Brand Development 
More than a logo, your brand is an experience. We help you distinguish your brand and reach a potential you didn’t even know existed.
   
	
		
		
			
		
	
Social Media Engagement 
Brands need to connect to their audience through organic and authentic content. We ensure clients have a strong and approachable presence online.
   
	
		
			Trusted By:

		
	

	
		
		
			
		
	

	
		
		
			
		
	

	
		
		
			
		
	

	
		
		
			
		
	

	
		
		
			
		
	

	
		
		
			
		
	

	
		
		
			
		
	

	
		
		
			
		
	

	
		
		
			
		
	

	
		
		
			
		
	

	
		
		
			
		
	

	
		
		
			
		
	

	
		
		
			
		
	

	
		
		
			
		
	

	
		
		
			
		
	

	
		
		
			
		
	

	
		
		
			
		
	

	
		
		
			
		
	

	
		
		
			
		
	

	
		
		
			
		
	

	
		
		
			
		
	

	
		
		
			
		
	

	
		
		
			
		
	

	
		
		
			
		
	

	
		
			
MISSION SUCCESS STORIES!
We design, dream, and launch integrated campaigns across multiple disciplines with your success in mind. We do so in our own unique way that combines all our collective talents and skills. Here’s a taste of what we have accomplished in the past, to help you determine how we can support you in the future.


		
	



	
	

		

		
			
				
					
						
															
							
							

							
						

						
							
								Public Relations, Social Media Engagement								Boys & Girls Clubs of Central Orange Coast								
							
						

						
					
				
			

		
			
				
					
						
															
							
							

							
						

						
							
								Award Winning Creative, Brand Development, Marketing + Strategy, Public Relations, Social Media Engagement								Balboa Fun Zone								
							
						

						
					
				
			

		
			
				
					
						
															
							
							

							
						

						
							
								Advertising + Promotion, Award Winning Creative, Marketing + Strategy, Public Relations, Social Media Engagement								Indiana Jones Exhibit								
							
						

						
					
				
			

		
	


Explore Projects
	
		
			So What’s next?

		
	

	
		
			Are You Ready To Launch? Let’s Get Started!

		
	


					

		
	

					

					
					
				
			
		

		
					

		

							
					
			
			
	
		
							
								


						
										
								


 190 S. Glassell St., Ste 201, Orange, CA 92866
 714.694.7190
 [email protected]



	
		
	
	
		
	
		
		
	


						
										
					OUR SERVICES			
MARKETING + STRATEGY

PUBLIC RELATIONS

ADVERTISING + PROMOTION

AWARD WINNING CREATIVE

SOCIAL MEDIA ENGAGEMENT

						
													
					Instagram			

	
    
		
    
        
            Today, please pause to remember the fallen, and jo
            	                    
        
    

    
        
            The Rocket Science team loves telling stories abou
            	                    
        
    

    
        
            Boys & Girls Clubs of Central Orange Coast are doi
            	                    
        
    

    
        
            Podcast ad spending is a bright spot amid lacklust
            	                    
        
    
    

	

	
	    
        
	                
	            Follow on Instagram
    
	

	    
	
	


						
								
	



	
		

							
					

						
			
				
					


Copyright © 2020 Rocket Science Marketing & Public Relations – All Rights Reserved



Terms of Use



				
			

			
						
					
				
			
			
		
	


								
				
			
		

					
		
		
			
			
			
		
	

	
	
		
		
			
				
				
				
			
			
				
					
					
					
					
					
						
							
								
							
						
					
				
				
					
				
				
				
				
				
				
					
				
			
		
	
	

		

	
				
			











































		
		We use cookies to ensure that we give you the best experience on our website. If you continue to use this site we will assume that you are happy with it.Ok