Rocket Science

by John Walker





Trident II-D5 PEM-1 test launch, 1989-04-21.Public domain.



“Rocket science” has often been used as a metaphor for something 
complicated, arcane, or difficult. Well, as one who has from time to 
time been called complicated, arcane, and difficult myself, I’m 
going to try to explain the essentials of it to you in this brief 
essay. There will be some math, but nothing you can’t do on a 
spreadsheet, pocket calculator, or
slide rule.



First, let me distinguish rocket science, the physics which 
underlies rocket propulsion, which is relatively simple, from rocket 
engineering, which encompasses disciplines including propellant 
chemistry, thermodynamics, structural and vibration analysis, 
aerodynamics, guidance and control theory, fluid dynamics, and 
metallurgy. Rocket engineering is genuinely difficult, and is made 
even more challenging since most rockets are not reusable and hence, 
when you push the launch button, you’re trying out everything in a 
real flight for the first time.



At the level of the basic science, however, a rocket is pretty 
simple. You have a structure, usually tubular in shape, which holds 
some kind of propellant. In a chemical rocket, the propellant(s) 
burn, producing hot gases which issue from a nozzle at one end of 
the tube. The ejection of these gases creates, under
Newton’s third 
law of motion, a reaction force upon the rocket, causing it to 
accelerate. How much acceleration do we get by burning all the 
propellant in a rocket? That’s given by the
rocket equation, which 
Konstantin Tsiolkovsky
applied in the late 19th century in his 
investigations of the feasibility of space flight. Don’t be afraid: 
it’s pretty straightforward once you get past the notation. Let’s 
look it in the face.







Δv (pronounced delta-vee) is the change in velocity which will 
result from burning all of the propellant in the rocket. This will 
have units like metres/second (m/s). The velocity of the exhaust 
which comes out of the rocket is ve in the same units. The total 
mass of the rocket, including propellant, at the time of launch is 
m0. The mass of the rocket (structure, payload, engine(s), 
avionics, etc.) which remains after all the fuel is burned is mf. 
(This is sometimes called the “dry mass”, although that doesn’t 
really make sense in the case of solid rockets.) You can specify m0 
and mf in any mass units (kilograms, tonnes, etc.) as long as they 
are the same: only the ratio matters. The
natural logarithm function 
is ln. The key thing you need to know about the ln function is that 
it grows very slowly as its argument increases. This, as we’ll see, 
is what makes rocketry so difficult.



You’ll often hear the performance of rocket engines and propellants 
specified in terms of
specific impulse,
or Isp. For rockets (as 
opposed to, say, air-breathing engines), this is simply another way 
of expressing the exhaust velocity, obtained by dividing the exhaust 
velocity by the gravitational acceleration at the Earth’s surface. 
If you have exhaust velocity in metres per second, you obtain Isp 
in units of seconds by dividing by the acceleration of gravity of 
9.8 m/s².







One advantage of using Isp is that it’s the same regardless of 
which unit you use for length.



Let’s put some numbers on this to see the magnitude of what we’re 
talking about. Here are the exhaust velocities produced by some 
commonly used rocket propellants in modern, high-performance engines.







LOX is
liquid oxygen;
LH2 is
liquid hydrogen.
Both are gases which 
must be liquefied and stored at
cryogenic
temperatures. Liquid 
hydrogen must be kept even colder than LOX and, because its density 
is low, requires large fuel tanks.
RP-1
is essentially kerosene, and 
requires no special handling beyond that of diesel fuel or home 
heating oil.
Nitrogen tetroxide
(N2O4) and
hydrazine
(N2H4) are 
liquids at room temperature and can be stored indefinitely, ready to 
use. They are
hypergolic
with one another: they burst into 
combustion spontaneously on contact, so when used in rocket engines, 
no igniter is required; this makes them attractive for engines which 
must restart multiple times. Unfortunately, both nitrogen tetroxide 
and hydrazine are highly toxic and must be handled with extreme 
caution. A wide variety of solid rocket propellants are used. They 
have both fuel and oxidiser mixed together, and require only an 
igniter to set them burning. Obviously, great care must be taken 
that they aren’t ignited prematurely, and once lit, they burn to 
completion whether you like it or not. The one I’ve cited here is 
ammonium
perchlorate composite propellant
(APCP). Other widely used 
solid propellants are
HTPB
and
PBAN
(follow the links for their jaw-breaking names).



All right, enough with the equations, numbers, and acronyms. Let’s 
go fly a rocket and see how all this stuff actually works. We’ll 
begin with a very simple rocket, the
GEM-60
solid rocket booster 
optionally used by the
Delta IV
launch vehicles. While it is 
normally used as a booster in the early part of a launch and then 
jettisoned, here we’re going to launch it by itself, just to see 
what happens. We will have no payload: just the rocket itself. Fully 
packed with propellant, the GEM-60 weighs 33,638 kg (m0). At 
burn-out, just 91 seconds later, the final mass (mf) is but 3,941 
kg. Exhaust velocity (ve) from the HTPB solid fuel is 2401 m/s, for 
an Isp of 245 s. Plugging these numbers into the rocket equation, 
we find Δv to be 5148 m/s. Now, the rocket equation is for an ideal 
rocket, operating perfectly efficiently in a vacuum without the 
effects of air resistance or gravity, but let’s just go with that 
number for the moment. This is pretty fast; in fact, “faster than a 
speeding bullet” doesn’t do justice to it. The
5.56×45 NATO round
fired by the M-16 rifle has a muzzle velocity of 940 m/s, so our 
rocket will not just be faster than the bullet, but more than five 
times faster. Pretty impressive, but what if we want to go to orbit?



Forget about it!  Orbital velocity in
low Earth orbit
is around 7.8 
km/s, but when you take into account the effects of gravity and air 
resistance during the first part of the rocket’s flight through the 
thick atmosphere, you’ll need around 9.5 km/s of Δv to get to orbit 
if you’re launching toward the East reasonably close to the equator, 
more otherwise. (When launching to the East, you get to add the 
Earth’s rotation to your Δv for free.) Now, you might think, from 
the simple rocket we’ve just worked out, “Well, we’re half way 
there. How hard can it be?” And now we come back to that natural 
logarithm function in the rocket equation; it’s a killer. With a 
little algebra we can rewrite the equation as:







The quantity on the left is called the
mass ratio:
the ratio of the 
mass of the rocket at launch to the mass at burnout. Now you can see 
that this ratio increases exponentially as the ratio of Δv to 
exhaust velocity grows. The mass ratio of our simple rocket was 
33638/3941=8.5. In other words, just 12% of the rocket’s weight at 
liftoff remained at burnout: at launch the rocket was 88% 
propellant. All right, let’s crank the numbers for an orbital 
launch, which requires a Δv of 9500 m/s. Now watch that exponential 
kick in! We get a mass ratio of, not 8.5, but 52! To reach orbit, 
our rocket would have to be 98% propellant on the launch pad. If we 
wanted to put one tonne (1000 kg) in orbit (including the rocket in 
the payload), we’d need the rocket to mass 52 tonnes on the launch 
pad. Not only is this ridiculously inefficient, we simply lack the 
materials to build structures this light compared to the weight they 
support.



What if we used a more energetic fuel? In the
Golden Age of science 
fiction, many stories featured the discovery of a super-powerful 
rocket fuel which would open up the space frontier, and intrigue and 
derring-do involving access to the fuel. Experience has taught that 
unless you want to work with stuff so
hideously toxic, volatile, 
expensive, and recalcitrant that nobody in their right mind would 
consider it, liquid oxygen and liquid hydrogen are the best you can 
do when it comes to chemical propellants. They are efficient, 
non-toxic, reasonably inexpensive, and their combustion product is 
just water vapour. Let’s try a LOX/LH2 rocket and see how far we 
get. We’ll start with the first stage of the
Delta IV launcher, 
which burns those propellants. This stage hasn’t ever been launched 
by itself, so we’ll add 500 kg for a nose cone, guidance system, and 
avionics with which it isn’t usually equipped. The stage, fully 
fuelled, has a mass of 228,400 kg and empty, 26,400 kg. Its 
energetic fuel delivers an exhaust velocity of 4057 m/s, or an Isp 
of 414. Recall that exhaust velocity is in the denominator of that 
ratio in the exponential: this is an enormous improvement over the 
solid fuel booster! Our mass fraction, 8.7, is about the same, but 
the energetic fuel gives us a Δv of 8678 m/s. Much better, but we’re 
still short of the 9500 or so we need to get to orbit, and we’re 
still not carrying any payload.



We’re already using the highest energy fuel that’s practical, and 
burning it in a
modern, high-performance rocket engine. The rocket 
structure is so light it allows 88% of the liftoff weight to be 
fuel. What is to be done? If only we could launch our rocket at a 
higher altitude, with a kick to get it started, rather than having 
to make it crawl all the way up from the ground through the dense 
lower atmosphere, losing Δv to the drag of gravity! Well, that’s 
exactly what we’ll do.







    Bumper 8 V-2/WAC Corporal RTV-G-4 launch fromCape Canaveral, 1950-07-24. Public domain.




From the early days of rocketry, engineers who worked out the 
consequences of the rocket equation realised it was extraordinarily 
difficult to get to orbit from Earth’s surface. But, being 
engineers, they immediately asked themselves, “Can we cheat?” It 
turns out, you can. The trick is to use a large rocket to launch, as 
its payload, a smaller rocket. When the big rocket burns out, the 
smaller rocket is ignited, except now it’s not being launched from 
Earth, but rather with a high altitude and velocity, where its 
engine will operate more efficiently and have to provide less than 
the total Δv to get to orbit. This idea was demonstrated at the end 
of the 1940s by the
RTV-G-4 Bumper
program, which used a German V-2 
to launch an American WAC Corporal rocket, which ultimately reached 
an altitude of 393 km. The Bumper launch pictured at the left was 
the first rocket launch from Cape Canaveral.



Now we’re going to get real. Let’s put some serious payload in low 
Earth orbit. We’ll start with the first stage of the Delta IV we 
used in the last example, but use it to launch a second stage: 
another rocket, which carries the actual payload. The properties and 
performance of the first stage are identical to those above. The 
second stage, which is called the
Delta Cryogenic Second Stage
(CSS), has a launch mass of 30,710 kg and a mass at burnout of 3490 
kg. It is also fueled with LOX/LH2, but since its engine only 
operates in a vacuum, is more efficient, with an exhaust velocity of 
4628 m/s, or an Isp of 462 s. On top of the second stage, we’ll 
stack a payload of 8000 kg (including a
fairing
we’ll dispose of 
after getting out of the atmosphere, but we’re doing science, not 
engineering here, so let’s neglect those details).





    Delta IV orbital launch, 2003-08-29.U.S. Air Force image, public domain.




Three—two—one—zero—ignition—liftoff! The stack (first stage, second 
stage, and payload) lumbers off the launch pad. The numbers for the 
first stage are the same, but we must add the mass of the second 
stage and payload, which are (30710+8000)=38710 kg. As expected, 
this reduces Δv for the first stage, to 5092 m/s. But the second 
stage starts its work at this sweet spot, made even sweeter because 
it’s now outside the sensible atmosphere and runs more efficiently. 
To the mass of the second stage, we add the payload of 8000 kg. When 
the second stage burns out, it has contributed a Δv of 4451 m/sec, 
for a total for the two stages of 9543 m/s. We’ve delivered our 
payload to orbit.



Consider how difficult this was to do. The payload, 8 tonnes, is now 
in orbit. The total mass of the launcher was 267 tonnes less than 
ten minutes before. Only 3% of the mass of the launcher remains when 
the payload separates from the second stage; all the rest is junk. 
Even without considering the innumerable engineering details needed 
to accomplish such a mission, getting to orbit is hard. If the Earth 
were only slightly more massive than it is, it would be impossible 
to get to orbit using chemical propellants. Perhaps when we 
encounter other spacefaring species, most will hail from smaller 
planets, around the more numerous red dwarf stars. They’d be of 
slight stature, and have large eyes adapted to the dimmer light of 
their stars. But I’m not
going there.




Rocket science can be fun, and it isn’t complicated. All you need to 
work out “what if” scenarios is a spreadsheet or pocket calculator, 
and abundant information available in the public domain on the 
Internet.




Here are the fundamentals of rocket propulsion explained in 1950 by 
that eminent rocket scientist, Prof. Woody Woodpecker, from 
Destination Moon.








This is a TEDxHouston talk by astronaut Donald Pettit about the 
tyranny of the rocket equation.








Scott Manley demonstrates rocket science with
Kerbal Space Program
and a spreadsheet.






















by John Walker
August, 2016



This document is in the public domain.


Astronomy and Space at Fourmilab
Physics at Fourmilab
Fourmilab Home Page