Accessibility Links
    
        Skip to Main Content
        Skip to Main Navigation
        Skip to Footer
    


  

                  

    
        
            
                
            
                            
                    
      Subscribe to BBC Science Focus Magazine
      Previous Issues
      Q&A
      Join the Science Focus Book Club
  
                
                        
                
    
    
		
	
	
    	
    		Sign In
    	
    	
    		Register
    	
    
    
    	
    
        Sign In
    
    
        Register
    
    



	
		
	
	
		
			 
	Settings

			
				Sign out
			
		
	
	
		
			My account
		
	

            
        
    

       
    
        

            
                
                
            

            
                          
                  
                            
    
            
        
            
                Sign up to our newsletters
            
        
    

    
            
              
                    
    


    
      
        

    
        
        
    
            
    
    

    
        
            

                
                    
    

    

                    
                

                
    
            
        
            
                Search
            
        
    

    
            
        
    

    
    

        
            
                              
                  
                            
    
            
        
            
                Sign up to our newsletters
            
        
    

    
            
                
                            
                                            
                            Future Technology
            
        
                                            
                            Nature
            
        
                                            
                            Space
            
        
                                            
                            The Human Body
            
        
                                            
                            Everyday science
            
        
                                            
                            Planet Earth
            
        
    
            
            
            
                
                                            
                            Subscribe to BBC Science Focus Magazine
            
        
                                            
                            Previous Issues
            
        
                                            
                            Q&A
            
        
                                            
                            Join the Science Focus Book Club
            
        
    
            
        
    

      
    
    
  

  

            
    
                                                                                
    
                                    
                                        
                        Home
                    
                    
                
                                                
                                            
                                        
                        Space
                    
                    
                
                                                
                    
                    What is rocket science?
                
                        

                                                        
        
            
			
			
	
	
		
					
    
        
                                
                    

        
    
        
    
        
    
        
    
        
    
        
    
        
    
        
    
    



        
        
        

                
This competition is now closed        
            
            
        
        
                        
            
        
    What is rocket science?

    
            
            
                            
                        
         Save 40% on an annual subscription to  BBC Science Focus Magazine
    
                
                    
    
    
        
            
            The theory behind blasting something into space isn’t as complicated as you might think. Putting it into practice, however, is a little bit trickier.
        
    
    
                        
                            
            

    
        

    
                    
                By Brian Clegg
            
            


    
        29th September, 2020 at 20:14 
                    
            
            
    


                        
                                        
                    




            
        
                      
              
      Share on Facebook
    
  

            
                  
      
                
        
                      
              
      Share on Twitter
    
  

            
                  
      
                
        
                      
              
      Share on Whatsapp
    
  

            
                  
      
                
        
                      
              
      Share on Reddit
    
  

            
                  
      
                
        
                      
              
      Email to a friend
    
  

            
                  
      
                                                      

      
                
                    
    

		
		
			
				
					
					
					
																

							
							

							
															
																			
																					
																	
							
																						
									
									Rocket science is all about using rocket propulsion to move anything from a firework to a manned spaceship.


    Advertisement


At the heart of rocketry is Isaac Newton’s Third Law of Motion, something that’s been established for over 300 years. It says that every action has an equal and opposite reaction. If you stand in front of a wall and push it hard, you will move backwards.
Similarly, if you stand on a skateboard and throw a heavy object away from you as hard as you can (don’t try this at home), you’ll roll in the opposite direction. As you push an object forwards, the object pushes back on you with the same amount of force.




In a rocket, the ‘object’ being pushed is the end product of burning fuel, which shoots out of the back of the rocket as the fuel burns, forcing the rocket to move in the opposite direction.
Is rocket science complicated?
Not at all. There are three basic requirements to a working rocket: get it moving, overcome the pull of gravity and plot a course. Each of these depends on physics that has been known since Newton’s day.
Rocketry in empty space is easy, but on Earth we have to overcome our planet’s gravity. This is where a rocket is so much better than a cannon. Science fiction writer Jules Verne suggested using the latter to fire a shell containing three passengers to the Moon in the 19th Century.
But a cannon has to get its payload up to the speed needed to leave Earth’s gravity – the escape velocity – by the time it leaves the barrel, because after that the only forces acting on it are gravity and air resistance, which both slow it down.

    


 French writer Jules Verne (1828 – 1905) © Getty Images

The acceleration to get Verne’s shell to the required 11.2km per second would squish the passengers inside. But a rocket can accelerate more gently for as long as its fuel lasts, gradually climbing out of the Earth’s gravity.
When it comes to plotting a course, once again, all we need is Newton’s physics, which allows us to understand how the flight path will be affected by the gravitational pulls of the Earth, the Sun and the Moon (the other planets will have influences too but these are small in a local flight), plus any ‘burns’ of the rocket engine.
What makes successful rocketry so difficult isn’t so much the science as the engineering. There’s so much complex technology in a rocket that it’s incredibly tough to be sure that everything is going to work.
So rocket science isn’t, erm, ‘rocket science’?
No, but then not everyone can grasp the basics of physics.
When, in 1920, American rocket pioneer Robert H Goddard said that a rocket from Earth could reach the Moon, The New York Times clearly failed to understand how rockets work.

    


 Apollo 11 takes off © Getty Images

An editorial in the newspaper commented: “That Professor Goddard, with his ‘chair’ in Clark College and the countenancing of the Smithsonian Institution, does not know the relation of action to reaction, and of the need to have something better than a vacuum against which to react – to say that would be absurd. Of course he only seems to lack the knowledge ladled out daily in high schools.”
Read more about rocket science:

A history of rocket science
Rocket science for beginners

What the editorial missed is that a rocket doesn’t push against the atmosphere – it’s pushed by the burning fuel that shoots out of its back.
The newspaper published a ‘correction’ in 1969, when Apollo 11 was on its way to the Moon, but never apologised for its mangling of Newton’s laws of physics and Goddard’s reputation.
How do rockets work?
All rockets work by the principle of throwing something out of the back to push the rocket forward, but exactly what that ‘something’ is can vary.
One of the earliest known devices using rocket propulsion was the aeolipile, which was designed by Hero of Alexandria in the 1st Century AD. It used steam emerging from tubes to spin a metal ball.

    


 Hero of Alexandria, Greek physicist and mathematician, invented the first steam-powered ‘rocket’ device in the 1st century AD © Mary Evans

Most rockets use flammable substances and it’s the energetic exhaust gases produced by burning them that provide thrust. Originally, such rockets were powered by gunpowder but more modern designs use either specialist solid fuel or gases like hydrogen, liquefied to maximise how much can be carried.
Space rockets have to be able to work without air, so they need an oxidiser to play the role of the oxygen in the atmosphere. This might be liquid oxygen or other substances.
The newest rocket technology is the ion drive or thruster. This is an electric-powered rocket, where charged particles (ions) are accelerated by an electric field to shoot out of the back of the rocket.
Thrusters are most commonly used for steering rockets as they’re very precise but quite weak. However, they could provide the main propulsion for a rocket that was designed for use in deep space.
How did rocket science begin?
Apart from Greek steam rockets, the earliest rockets were produced for firework displays and as weaponry in China, where they date back at least to the 13th Century.
Metal rockets for weapons began to be used in the West in the 19th Century. They were difficult to aim but provided an effective terror weapon and became popular for use from ships, as rockets have no recoil – unlike guns.
It’s this kind of use that Francis Scott Key, author of the US national anthem, had in mind when he referred to the “rockets’ red glare”.
Read more about space exploration:

Move over, Mars: why we should look further afield for future human colonies
NASA ‘pallet lander concept’ could be coming to a Moon near you soon

When it came to space travel, rockets appeared in stories decades before they were practical.
When the American establishment first began work on rocketry in the 1930s, the military is said to have found the whole concept too much like science fiction, so the development base in Pasadena, California was called the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, even though it never worked on jets, only rockets.
Similarly, the rocket packs used to help aircraft take off from short runways were said to have ‘JATO’ (jet-assisted take-off) to avoid the ‘R’ word.

    


 A captured German V-2 rocket leaves an American launchpad, after the second World War © Getty Images

Post-WWII space rockets of both the USA and the USSR were initially inspired by the German V-2 weapon. Its developer, Wernher von Braun, had little interest in the conflict but saw his work as a way to make his space travel dreams a reality.
After the war, both superpowers developed missiles from the V-2, and the Atlas rockets used to get the first American astronauts into space were originally designed as intercontinental ballistic missiles. Even the Saturn V rocket used in the Apollo programme had a lineage that went back through the Jupiter series to Redstone missiles.
Can rockets use oxygen from the atmosphere?
Space rockets carry an oxidiser, such as oxygen or hydrogen peroxide, to enable fuel to burn in space. Yet for the first and hardest part of the launch, they are travelling through the atmosphere.
If they could pick up oxygen as they went, it would significantly reduce the take-off weight. So it would be a huge advantage to use atmospheric oxygen while it’s available.

    


 SKYLON is currently in development and does not require a pilot. If successful, it will allow efficient aircraft-like access into space © NASA

The problem is that it’s a massive technical challenge.
In a hydrogen/oxygen rocket, like many used by NASA, the oxygen has to be compressed and cooled to around -140°C before it mixes with the hydrogen, which must take place in around 1/100th of a second, while avoiding ice blockages from moisture in the air.


    
        
            
                
                     Get our daily LUNCHTIME GENIUS newsletter 
                    
                        Want to feel a little smarter while you snack on a sandwich? Our daily newsletter arrives just in time for lunch, offering up the day's biggest science news, our latest features, amazing Q&As and insightful interviews. PLUS a free mini-magazine for you to download and keep.
                    
                    
                        
                            Thanks! Look out for your Lunchtime Genius newsletter in your inbox soon.
                        
                                                    Already have an account with us? Sign in to manage your newsletter preferences
                            
                            
                                
                                    
    
            
        
            
                Sign in
            
        
    

    
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
    
            
        
            
                Register
            
        
    

    
                                
                            
                            
                                            
                
            
            
                
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                    


                            

                            
                                
                                    
                                        
    
            
        
            
                Sign me up!
            
        
    

    
                                    
                                
                            
                        
                    
                
            
            
                
                    
                        By entering your details, you are agreeing to BBC Science Focus Magazine terms and conditions. You can unsubscribe at any time.
                    
                
            
        
    


This has been achieved in the SABRE propulsion system that was built by the British company Reaction Engines. The hope is that this will soon be used in working rocket motors, designed for the SKYLON spaceplane.
Why do big rockets have multiple stages?
One of the biggest differences between the rockets of early science fiction and the actual ones that took people into space was that the real rockets had multiple stages that fell away as the rocket left Earth.
This idea was first developed by Russian schoolteacher and rocket pioneer Konstantin Tsiolkovsky as early as 1903.

    


 Russia’s Soyuz MS-09 spacecraft carrying the members of the International Space Station (ISS) expedition © Getty Images

The stages reflect the need to carry a lot of fuel to allow the rocket to escape Earth’s gravitational pull. When the fuel tanks are empty, they’re just extra mass that needs to be accelerated, wasting fuel.
By dropping off a stage when its fuel is exhausted (or having disposable external tanks like the Space Shuttle), the remaining craft becomes much lighter, needing less fuel to accelerate it.
Tsiolkovsky was a theorist and it was Goddard who constructed the first practical multi-stage experimental rockets.

    


 The International Space Station orbits at an altitude of around 354km (220 miles) © NASA

Spacecraft returning to Earth use a combination of air resistance, wings (notably on the Space Shuttle) and parachutes to slow down the ship on re-entry, unlike most spaceships in science fiction, which land slowly under rocket power.
Rockets are used for landing where there’s no air and relatively little gravity, such as on the Moon, but a ship simply can’t carry enough fuel to make a soft landing on Earth – it uses most of its fuel getting away in the first place.
To return to the Earth with rockets would need some form of refuelling capability in space, which is not currently feasible.
Where have rockets been used?
We are familiar with rockets in firework displays and space vehicles but the military have made use of rocket technology in warfare for a long time, from early devices that were little more than metal bottle rockets to modern missiles and rocket-propelled grenades.
Elsewhere, rockets have had a life-saving use in rescue flares, as a way of getting a line between ships to winch stranded sailors to safety, and in the ejector seats of military planes.

    


 James Bond (Sean Connery) makes a hasty jet-pack assisted getaway in Thunderball (1965) © EON Productions

The jetpack used in the James Bond film Thunderball was more accurately a rocket pack, while rockets have also powered cars and sleds to record speeds. If you want a lot of thrust for a relatively short period of time, a rocket is often the best solution.
Will we always use rockets?
Some rockets, like ion drives, are always likely to be useful. But it would be ideal if we could replace rockets, both to get away from Earth and for the kind of long-term acceleration needed to make travel to the outer Solar System, or even other stars, commonplace.
One alternative to rockets is the space elevator.
This involves running an extremely long cable from a satellite down to Earth’s surface. A mechanical device would then be used to climb up it, hauling a payload into space. It’s a great concept as it would be much cheaper than rockets, and doesn’t need to carry its fuel.
But we don’t have any materials strong enough to build a space elevator from Earth.

    


 Artist’s conception of the space elevator © Getty Images

The cable would have to be nearly 38,000km long. A typical 28mm steel cable of this length, capable of supporting around 50 tonnes, would weigh 115,000 tonnes. In principle, though, we have materials strong enough to build a space elevator on the Moon.
When it comes to deep space, we could replace some of the requirements for rockets with solar sails, which use the pressure of sunlight to gradually accelerate a vessel, or mass drivers, which are like external thrusters that push the whole ship.
Read even more about space exploration and rocket science:

How does the SpaceX Falcon compare with other rockets? 
Why the first plant grown on the Moon is a significant milestone in space exploration
Space travel affects heart cells, but only temporarily
Space war: the new arms race above our heads

But the most dramatic alternative, dreamt up in 1958, is to propel a ship by exploding tiny nuclear charges behind it, riding the shockwave.

The original Project Orion had the motto “Mars by 1966, Saturn by 1970”. It was never built (in part because the original idea to use these nuclear charges for taking off from Earth was, to say the least, impractical).
But the idea has been revisited in later concept spaceships. The huge advantage of nuclear fuel is that it compresses far more energy into a particular mass but the risks attached have so far made this approach impractical.


    Advertisement



This article first appeared in issue 287 of BBC Science Focus – find out how to subscribe here



        Jargon buster
Ballistic missile – One that starts under power, reaching a considerable height before dropping in freefall to its target. The V-2 was the first ballistic missile.
Intercontinental ballistic missile (icbm) – Modern space rockets were mostly developed from the rockets designed to send nuclear missiles around the world.
Ions – The ‘thruster’ or ‘ion drive’ uses ions as its reaction mass. Ions are atoms that have electrons removed or added and, as a result, have an electric charge that means they can be propelled by an electric field.
Meganewtons (MN) – Newtons (N) are the standard unit of force. 1N is the force required to accelerate 1kg through 1m per second per second. The downward force on 1kg due to the Earth’s gravity is 9.81N. A meganewton is a million newtons.
Reaction mass – The stuff thrown out of the back of a rocket to push it forward. In a traditional chemical rocket this is the exhaust gas from burning the fuel.
Thrust – The amount of force generated by an engine to push a vehicle forwards, such as the force that is generated by a rocket motor.


    

    
								
							
							
							

							
							
															
																			
																					
																	
							
							
														
							
																						
									




            
        
                      
              
      Share on Facebook
    
  

            
                  
      
                
        
                      
              
      Share on Twitter
    
  

            
                  
      
                
        
                      
              
      Share on Whatsapp
    
  

            
                  
      
                
        
                      
              
      Share on Reddit
    
  

            
                  
      
                
        
                      
              
      Email to a friend
    
  

            
                  
      
                                                      

								
							
							
							
														
								
							

							
															
									Authors
																			
																							
													
    
    
      
        Brian Clegg
      
    
          
  
												
																					
																	
													
					
										
					
					    

        Tags

        
                                                
                        
    
    Engineering
        
    
                    
                                    
                        
    
    Physics
        
    
                    
                                    
                        
    
    Space exploration
        
    
                    
                                    
    

				

								
					
    
        

        
    
    
        
            

            
            
                                      
                                                  
        
    
    

        
                    
                
Pay by Direct Debit and get 40% off an annual subscription*
Receive every issue delivered direct to your door with FREE UK delivery

            
        
                    
                
    
            
        
            
                BUY NOW
            
        
    

    
            
          

            
    
        
            
                
                    Latest
                                            
                                                            
                                    

    
        

    

        
            
    
        
            
                        
        
    
        
    
        
    
        
    
        
    
        
    
        
    
    

        
    


        
        

                    
            
        
            The Human Body
        
    
    

            

        
                Should I be worried if I don’t do 10,000 steps a day?
    


            
            
            
        

    

    
    
    


    
                                
                                                            
                                    

    
        

    

        
            
    
        
            
                        
        
    
        
    
        
    
        
    
        
    
        
    
        
    
    

        
    


        
        

                    
            
        
            Science news
        
    
    

            

        
                Earth lost 60 per cent of its atmosphere during asteroid impact thought to have created the Moon
    


            
            
            
        

    

    
    
    


    
                                
                                                    
                                    
            
        
    
        
    
    
        

        
    

				
			
		

		
			
        
            
                
                    You may like
                                            
                                                            
                                    

    
        

    

        
            
    
        
            
                        
        
    
        
    
        
    
        
    
        
    
        
    
        
    
    

        
    


        
        

                    
            
        
            Space
        
    
    

            

        
                A history of rocket science
    


            
            
            
        

    

    
    
    


    
                                
                                                            
                                    

    
        

    

        
            
    
        
            
                        
        
    
        
    
        
    
        
    
        
    
        
    
        
    
    

        
    


        
        

                    
            
        
            Space
        
    
    

            

        
                Rocket science for beginners
    


            
            
            
        

    

    
    
    


    
                                
                                                            
                                    

    
        

    

        
            
    
        
            
                        
        
    
        
    
        
    
        
    
        
    
        
    
        
    
    

        
    


        
        

                    
            
        
            Space
        
    
    

            

        
                Are atoms expanding as the Universe expands?
    


            
            
            
        

    

    
    
    


    
                                
                                                            
                                    

    
        

    

        
            
    
        
            
                        
        
    
        
    
        
    
        
    
        
    
        
    
        
    
    

        
    


        
        

                    
            
        
            Everyday science
        
    
    

            

        
                Leonardo da Vinci named as science’s greatest genius
    


            
            
            
        

    

    
    
    


    
                                
                                                    
                                            
                                                            
                                    

    
        

    

        
            
    
        
            
                        
        
    
        
    
        
    
        
    
        
    
        
    
        
    
    

        
    


        
        

                    
            
        
            Space
        
    
    

            

        
                Could a bird fly in space if provided with oxygen?
    


            
            
            
        

    

    
    
    


    
                                
                                                            
                                    

    
        

    

        
            
    
        
            
                        
        
    
        
    
        
    
        
    
        
    
        
    
        
    
    

        
    


        
        

                    
            
        
            Everyday science
        
    
    

            

        
                Six mind-blowing physics lessons from our new podcast series with Prof Jim Al-Khalili
    


            
            
            
        

    

    
    
    


    
                                
                                                            
                                    

    
        

    

        
            
    
        
            
                        
        
    
        
    
        
    
        
    
        
    
        
    
        
    
    

        
    


        
        

                    
            
        
            Space
        
    
    

            

        
                Can you have a shock wave in space?
    


            
            
            
        

    

    
    
    


    
                                
                                                            
                                    

    
        

    

        
            
    
        
            
                        
        
    
        
    
        
    
        
    
        
    
        
    
        
    
    

        
    


        
        

                    
            
        
            Everyday science
        
    
    

            

        
    
    
            
        New Podcast
    
        Everything You Wanted To Know About…Physics with Jim Al-Khalili
    


            
            
            
        

    

    
    
    


    
                                
                                                    
                                    
            
        
    
		

		
						
		

					
    
    
            
            
            
            
        
    
		
		
	

        
    

                        
    
        
            
    
                    
                
                    
                        
                    
                
                
                    Special offer
                    Save 40% on an annual subscription
                                            
    
            
        
            
                SUBSCRIBE NOW
            
        
    

    
                                    
            
                    
                
                    
                        
                    
                
                
                    BBC Science Focus Special Editions
                    Discover our latest special editions covering a range of fascinating topics from the latest scientific discoveries to the big ideas explained.
                                            
    
            
        
            
                ORDER NOW
            
        
    

    
                                    
            
                    
                
                    
                        
                    
                
                
                    Science Focus Podcast
                    Listen to some of the brightest names in science and technology talk about the ideas and breakthroughs shaping our world. 
                                            
    
            
        
            
                LISTEN
            
        
    

    
                                    
            
            



    
        
            
                
                     Get our daily LUNCHTIME GENIUS newsletter 
                    
                        Our daily newsletter arrives just in time for lunch, offering up the day's biggest science news, our latest features, amazing Q&As and insightful interviews. PLUS a free mini-magazine for you to download and keep.
                    
                    
                        
                            Thanks! Look out for your Lunchtime Genius newsletter in your inbox soon.
                        
                                                    Already have an account with us? Sign in to manage your newsletter preferences
                            
                            
                                
                                    
    
            
        
            
                Sign in
            
        
    

    
                                
                            
                            
                                
                                    
    
            
        
            
                Register
            
        
    

    
                                
                            
                            
                                            
                
            
            
                
                    
                        
                            
                            

                                                            
                            
                            
                                
                                    

                                
                            

                            
                                
                                    
                                        
    
            
        
            
                Sign me up!
            
        
    

    
                                    
                                
                            
                        
                    
                
            
            
                
                    
                        By clicking “sign up” you are agreeing to our terms and conditions. You can unsubscribe at any time. For more information about how to do this, and how Immediate Media Company Limited (publisher of Science Focus) holds your personal information, please see our privacy policy.
                    
                
            
        
    

        
    


    
        Site footer

        
            
                            
                                            
                            
                                
      Visit us on Facebook
    
  

                            
                        
                                                                
                            
                                
      Visit us on Pinterest
    
  

                            
                        
                                                                
                            
                                
      Visit us on Twitter
    
  

                            
                        
                                                                                    
                            
                                
      Visit us on YouTube
    
  

                            
                        
                                                                
                            
                                
      Visit us on Instagram
    
  

                            
                        
                                                                
                            
                                
      Subscribe to our RSS feed
    
  

                            
                        
                                    
                    

                    

            
            Terms & Conditions
        
            
            Privacy policy
        
            
            Cookies policy
        
            
            Code of conduct
        
            
            Licensing
        
            
            Magazine subscriptions
        
            
            Contact Us
        
    
            
            
                Manage cookies
            
        
    
        
    

    
    
        
                            
                    
                        Immediate Media
                    
                
            
            
                                    This website is published by Immediate Media Company Limited under licence from BBC Studios Distribution.
                
                                        © Immediate Media Company Ltd 2020.